notes week four

to do:

    -week 3 reading 3
    -spatial archaeology
    -consolidation document

Geographic Visualization in Archaeology
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/77997647.pdf

    Archaeologists are not only thought of by their  colleagues in the social sciences and humanities as frontrunners in employing GIS,but are sometimes looked upon with  envy  for  their  apparent  embrace  of  the ‘spatial  turn’several  decades  ahead  of  most  other disciplines (Bodenhamer  et  al.  2010).  
    A common argument in many early works was that GIS should allow more than just making “pretty pictures”(Ebert 2004: 320). In this context, GIS applications were thought of as a three-component hierarchy consisting of analysis, management, and visualization or representation of archaeological  data  in  map  forms  (Ebert  2004:  320-321).  In  this  conceptualization  (Fig.1),  the complexity  of the tasks  had  a  direct  relationship  with  prestige,where  analytical  tasks provided the   greatest   prestige   ofall   three   components.   The   traditional   simple   map visualization capabilities  of  GIS,  while  readily  acknowledged  as “vital”(Ebert  2004:  320),  were  quickly downplayed as “output and display”or the “read-only mode of GIS”(Ebert 2004: 319-320). 
    existing geospatial tools and technologies such as GIS fall short  for  archaeological phenomena, not  because  of  a  lack  of  computing  performance,  or  limited  memory  size,  but  rather  because these tools are often inadequate in facilitating an understanding of complex real-world processes and  events.  Specifically,  time-dependent  spatial  phenomena  that  archaeologists  study  are  not easily  captured  in  algorithms  for  automated  processing.  As  a  result,  archaeologists  too  often reduce   phenomena   in   size   and   complexity   to   match   the   capabilities   of   existing   tools. Furthermore,  while  mapsare  primarily  meant  to  communicate  results,  maps  and  visualization have great potential in heuristic methods that facilitate information processing in archaeology.
    despite  some  of  its  limitations, archaeologists  often described  GIS  as  an  ideal  technology  for  storing, managing and  analyzing archaeological  field data (Ebert  2004:  319).  
    Recent  developments  in  cartographic  representation  of  information  are  premised on  two  key  changes  in  the  field,  namely,  that  there  are “new  things”to  represent  and “new methods”to  represent  them  (Fairbairn et  al.  2001:  1).  
    advanced visualization methods encourage use of our cognitive abilities (rather than equations and algorithms) to process information and generate new knowledge.
    Visualizations, such as maps, are used to communicate information and can be studied in the more  general  context  of  the  communication  or  information  transmission  model  (Fig.2).  Under this   model,   measurement   of   the   transmission   of   information   through   a   unidirectional communication  system  is  of  key  interest,  with  a  particular  focus  on  assessing  the  loss  of information upon reaching non-specialists. 
    In the representational model, a map-form is not solely a static communication  device.  Rather,  maps  and  map-forms  can  facilitate  dynamic  interaction  and identification  of  unknown  spatial  patterns  and  relationships  in  complex  data  (MacEachren  andKraak   1997:   338).   Thus   examination   of   how   the   content   of   a   map   facilitates   spatial understanding of complex phenomena, and how and why these representations acquire meaning, are of greatest interest (Dodge et al. 2008). 
    This  situation  however,  does  not  mean  that  maps  and  map-forms  are  not  used  to  present knowledge  claims  or  that  they  do  not  reflect  the  scholars’values,  beliefs  and  interests  (Harley 1988).  Rather,  geographic  visualization  (geovisual)  methods draw  attention  to,  and  harness human  cognition for  information  processing  through  pattern  recognition.  To  facilitate  these capabilities, geovisualization methods aim to create display environments such as multiple linked views  that  enable  visual  investigation  through  interaction  with  information  (Andrienko  et  al. 2011).
    Up  until  very  recently,  maps  represented  a synchronous  or  snapshot view  of  the  past, where  an  examination  of  change  through  time  was limited.  Through  careful  examination,  weshow  how  maps  and  other  traditional  geographic visualizations have been used as a communication tool and we discuss what insights are gained through conventional static maps when examining complex archaeological phenomena. Next, wediscuss  how  archaeologists  have  sought  to  examine  change  through  time  in  GIS,  as  well  as geovisualizations  that  can  offer  perspectiveon  complex  archaeological  data.  Finally, wewill discuss   current   themes   and   trends   in   geovisualization   that   are   particularly   relevant   for archaeology. 
    **Often  termed  legacy  data,  archaeological  collections  in  local  and  national  repositories  are increasingly  being  digitized  and  integrated  with  new  archaeological  data  for  combined  analysis (Kintigh et al. 2015). Because repositories, physical or otherwise, are themselves a product of the society  in  which  they  were  created,  they  are  influenced  by  their  social,  political,  cultural  and historical  circumstances  (Cox  and  Wallace  2002).  For  example,  how  and  why  particular collections  are  chosen  for  digitization  and  which  classes  of  data  within  them  are  preserved  in digital  format  can  impact  subsequent  study.  Investigations  that  integrate  new  data  with  existing collections  then  take  on  their  assumptions  and  limitations  (Atici  et  al.  2013),  in addition  to uncertainties   in   the   new   data   (Allison   2008).**
    **commercial GIS do not easily handle uncertainty (Devillers and Jeansoulin 2006).**
    Placing  visualization  as  one  stage  in  the  cyclical  process  of archaeological  practice  (Fig.3)  can  give  insights  into  field  methods  from  both ‘top-down’and ‘bottom-up’perspectives, which in turn can revitalize the relationship between the collection and interpretation of archaeological data.
    In  their  recent  article, “Mapping  the  Political  Landscape:  Toward  a  GIS  Analysis  of Environmental  and  Social  Difference”in  Inka society,  Kosiba  and Bauer  make  explicit  thatlandscape  is  more  than  a  physical  space.  They  argue  that  landscapes  are  political  spaces “constituted by social categories and spatial boundaries”(Kosiba and Bauer 2013: 67). They use a combination of field survey and GIS-based viewshed analysis, a measure of the visibility of the physical  landscape  and  settlement  features as  a  reflection  ofthe “systemic  decision-making process”that facilitates “surveillance”in a local space (2013: 64). Visibility thus, is a proxy for perceptions of the Inka landscape.
    Fig. 5 Copyrighted ImageSee Kosiba and Bauer 2013 (Figs.2, 5, 9)
        -I really do think that academia ought to kick this intellectual property bucket.
    They  also  use  photographs  of  stone  houses  (scale  not indicated)  to  argue  that  elite  Inkas  perceived  power  differently  from  common  people.  The criterion for measuring authority is limited to one variable: range of visibility from each recorded residence.
    Viewshed analysis on elite residences, however,  did not show a preference for commanding views(2013: 77). Rather, Kosiba and Bauer found that commoner residences often had views of “more  elaborate”elite  buildings,  including  ceremonial  architecture  (2013:  82).  Surprisingly,  the authorsconclude  that  elite  residences  were “built  in  places  that  maximize  surveillance  of commoners’residences”(2013:  82).  Next,  Kosiba  and  Bauer  measure  visibility  of  glaciated mountain  peaks  from  residences  and  they  conclude  that  a  greater  proportion  of  elite  residences compared  with  commoner  ones  have  line-of-sight  to those  physical  features.  They  explain  that the pattern reflects a “pronounced link”that enhanced Inka elite claims to social authority (2013: 81-82).  
    Jones  (2010:  10)  compares historic  sites  against  a  set  of  computer-generated  points  and concludes  that “transportation”or proximity   to   overland   trails   was   a   key   factor   in   settlement   distribution   such   that   the Haudenosaunee   placed “themselves   near   overland   transportation   routes   or   vice   versa”. Furthermore,  Jones  remarks  that  defensibility  was  not  a  significant  factor  in  the  pattern  and distribution of historic settlements.
    Interestingly,  Jones  does  not  visually  present results  of  the  viewshed  analysis,  nor  does  the author perform spatial analysis on distance to overland trails. This is particularly surprising as he remarks  that “Oneida  and  Onondaga  villages  gravitated  toward  inaccessible  physiographic locations  more  thanother  nations”(2010:  9).  Rather,  Jones  presents  three  small  scale  maps  to situate  the  reader  in  New  York  State.  On  these  maps,  he  uses  points  to  show  the  location  and distribution of 125 known sites occupied during the two hundred year study period and overland trails  thathe  represents  as  lines.  Jones  (2010:  9)  stresses  the “positive  spatial  correlation”between  villages  and  overland  trails,  and  notes  the  influence  on  settlement  distribution  of  the “unique  political  arrangement  of  Northern  Iroquoian  confederacies”during  the  16thcentury (2010: 10). 
    Yet Jones fails to explain why villages are not located throughout the extensive  trail  network.  This  oversight  casts  doubt  on  his  statement  (2010:  4)  that  there  are “likely few undiscovered village sites”. Furthermore, Jones’assessment that defensibility was not a significant factor in settlement pattern and distribution is unexpected, given that elsewhere, the author has remarked that Iroquoians often relied on clearlines-of-sight (Jones 2006). In this case, Jones stressed the importance of “mutual visibility”to communication between villages and  for their “mutual  defence”,  and  stated  that  the  Iroquois  were “likely  making  an  effort  to  maintain”such  visibility  (2006: 537).Such  a  practice  could  be  reflected  in  the  pattern  and  distribution  of settlement.
    In  his  examination  of  post-contact  Haudenosaunee  society,  Jones  uncritically  uses  historical and archaeological data collected by scholars who employed different methods, which is clearly problematic. 
    While he remarks on technical  issues with viewshed analysis,  Jones  does  not  discuss  potential  methodological  concerns  when  integrating  a  wide range of sources of historical information. 
    The previous section described examples of studies that used GIS to provide a ‘snapshot’or synchronic  view  of  the  past,  and  how  maps  function within  the  communication  model. While such an approach can be appropriate in some contexts, it can reduce the size and complexityof archaeological  phenomena,  limiting  its  explanatory  potential  with  regards  to how  and  why  past human societies changed. These interests cannot be overlooked or marginalized when employingcomputational methods and digital sources of information.
    Up  until  very  recently,  archaeologists tended  to  overlook  visualization  of  change  through timefor similar reasons they overlooked traditional GIS visualizations.The prevailing perception was  that  visualization  only  represents  something  already  known  from  the  data  and  does  not enable  knowledge  creation,  i.e.  seeing  change  through  time  does  not  help  explain  that  change. 
    Katsianis et al. (2008)and Tsipidis  et  al. (2011)both  offer  a ‘bottom-up’perspective  that  emphasizes  digital  recording in  the  field  and  further  processing  of  those  data  in  a  digital  environment  (e.g.  3D  models, multiple linked views) customized for visualization of archaeological data. Huisman et al. (2009)and  Johnson (1999)describe  the  challenges  and  potential  of ‘top-down’approaches  when navigatingarchaeological  data  that  another  scholar  has  collectedthrough  the ‘space-time-cube’and through temporal animation.
     The  authors  focus  onlinking  attribute  information  to “discrete  objects”(Katsianis  et  al.  2008:  657),  which  they  define  as  both  recovered  material culture  and  excavation  units,  or  what  they  (2008:  658)  call  the “conceptualization  of  archival events”in  the  process  of  archaeological  recovery.  In  their  model,  Katsianis  et  al.  include  six distinct “temporal categories”: the date of excavation, the date when a new event was created in the  information  system,  the  cultural  affiliation  of  artefacts,the  absolute  and radiocarbon  dates, and the excavation phase (2008: 661).
     The authors do not explain how an archaeologist not involved in the model’s creation might use it, nor do they present any kind of diachronic analysis using their data. However, Katsianis etal.’s distinction between ‘time attributes’(see also Koussoulakou and Styliandis 1999) reflects an awareness  that  computational  queries  on  change through  time are  best  served  when  multiple temporal values are recorded. 
     Space-time  cubes  allow  visualizing  changes  in a  given location  (x,  y)  of  phenomena  through time (z) (Kraak and Koussoulakou 2005; see Mlekuz 2010 for time-space aquarium). 
     A synchronization of the different views (e.g. 2D map and  timeline  of  events)  allows  users  to  discover  patterns  and  relationships  in  the  data  that contribute  to  generating  insights  into  complex  phenomena.  
     Huismanet  al.  (2009) --> sounds cool
     In their study, Tsipidis et al. (2011) designtechniques that enable visual analysis of complex archaeological  data  within  a  customizable  visualization  environment.  The  authors  argue  that traditional  GIS  assume  userexpertise  and  familiarity,  a  limitationthey  believeprevents  further development in visualization. To address this issue, the authors(2011: 90) offer a simplified and customizable  GIS  interface  that  enables3D  visualization of “temporal  characteristics  and relationships”,  querying,and  dynamic  presentation  to  aid  interpretation  and  enhances  user interaction with data.
    The  interface  articulates  multiple  linked  windows  with  a  main  viewer  and  a “temporal graph”(Tsipidis  et  al.  2011:  103).  The  temporal  graph  is  a  chart  with  dynamic  buttons corresponding  to  particular  archaeological  periods,such  as  Neolithic,  and “excavation  time”,which  is  the  date  of  the field  investigation.  
    The  authors  (Tsipidis  et al.  2011:  107)  remark  thatan understanding  of “temporal  diversity across  space”is important  for  archaeological  interpretation,  and  is enhanced  by “[linking] temporal graphs with the actual spatial elements of reference in 3D space”
    Animated maps, as Harrower and Fabrikant (2008: 50) define them, are “sequences of static graphic  depictions”that  when “shown  in  rapid  succession”,  enable  the  graphic  content  to “[move]  in  a  fluid  motion”.  As  such,  animationscan  assume  both  temporal  and  non-temporal forms.  
    Like  static  maps,  animated  maps  can  be  used  to  disseminate  knowledge  to  a wide  audience  and  to  enable  exploratory  data  analysis  by  scholars  and  scientists.  However, unlike  a  static  map  where  it  is  possible  to  carefully  examine  details  and  specific  places,  an animated  map  frame  is  on  screen  only  briefly.  Thus,  animated  maps  are  orientated  towards general patterning with emphasis on “change between moments”and to gain “overall perspective on  the  data”(Harrower  and  Fabrikant  2008:  50).  
    Johnson  (2002:  1)  points  out  that archaeologists may  locate  a  place  with  accuracy,  but  often  have “a  vague  notion  of  time”,  an  uncertainty  that can  lead  to  incorrect  generalizations.  
    Bevan  and Lake  (2013: 18)  have  remarked  that  the  past  ten  years  have  been “unusually  important”in  developing  and enhancing  new “techniques”in  archaeology  such  as “Digital  Archaeology”,  and “explicitly model-based  or  spatial  analytical  approaches”.  They  argue  that  these  developments  reflect  a “wider  democratization  process  in  computational  archaeology”(2013:  18;  see  also  Costa  et  al. 2013). As Bevan and Lake (2013: 18) explain, the developments result from a “growth in modern computing”, the availability of “sharply increased amounts of digital data”and a “wider climate of more open access to both data and software source code”. 
    In  this  context, Kintigh  (2006:  567)  has  stressed  the “pressing  need  for  anarchaeological information  infrastructure”that  enables  the  integration  of  data  from  different  sources. 
    Most critically,however,Web platforms in archaeology can promote ‘top-down’perspectivesthat  facilitate  an examination  of  the  overall  practice  of  archaeology. These  perspectives  are  necessary  as  current efforts  have  generally  overlooked  the  significant variability  in  archaeological  practices  across  nations  and  around  the  world,  a  situation  that impacts our overall view of human history.
    **Kintigh et al. (2015: 5) draw attention to the complexities in integrating collections  of “many  different  classes  of  items”that  enable  analysis  ranging  from “microscopic examination  of  a  portion  of  a  single  object  to  archaeological  sites  and  regional  settlement patterns”. Surprisingly,   the   authors   remark   only   briefly   on   a “[t]emporally   sequential visualization”and a “map-based tool”that can facilitate insightsinto past societies(Kintigh et al. 2015: 8).**
    **Combining  digital  and  digitized  sources  requires  what  the  digital  librarian  Donald Waters  (2007:  9)  calls “informatics  of  standards  and  practices”used  to “identify,  mark  up, manage,   preserve,   and   develop   the   algorithms   for   exploring   large   volumes   of   digital information”.  **
    Archaeologists recognize their data are often best (although not exclusively) represented visually (Llobera  2011).  Visualization  has  long  played  a  role  in  archaeology  (Molyneaux  1997;  Smiles and  Moser  2005; Alberti  et  al.  2013)  and  is  generally  conceptualized  within  a  communication model i.e. communicate results to a non-specialist audience. Archaeological visual media broadly refer  to “illustrations,  drawings,  maps,  photos,  models,  videos,  exhibitions”,  as  well  as  2D  and 3D “analogue  and  digital  graphic  productions”(Perry  2013:  281).  These  representations  have clear  overlap  with  cultural  heritage  displays.  Visualization  can  also  be  a “bridge”between specialists (Perry 2013: 283). 
    Geovisualization  however,  is  generally  underrepresented  in  archaeological  practice  (Miller and  Richards  1995)  and  this  oversight  impacts  the  development  of  effective  visualization  tools and  technologies  appropriate  for  digital  archaeological  data.  There  are  two  implications  of  this marginalization  in  archaeology.  First,  maps  are  underestimated  in  the  process  of  knowledge-making  as  we  have  argued,  and  they  are  thus  overlooked  as  a  source  of  spatial  information... Second,  while  maps  are primarily  meant  to communicate  results,  theyand other visualizations  can facilitate  information  processing  in archaeology.
    Asking how maps work draws attention to the interaction between them and human cognition (MacEachren 1995).  
    It  is  clear  that  recent  interest  in  visualization  of  the  temporal dimension can be beneficial for navigating archaeological data.
    Given known constraints on public monies for archaeology, we must invest available resources wisely so as to ensure we elicit the maximum amount of value for archaeologists. We cannot repeat, for instance,  the  unfortunate  practices  of  the  past  that  showered ‘black-box’resources  upon archaeology  such  as  described  by   Miller  and  Richards  (1995),  and  that  did  not  enable archaeologists to directly encode, model and visually analyze their data.  Rather, it is clear from recent efforts that archaeologists, with our interests in time-dependent spatial phenomena have as much  expertise  to  offer  in  the  development  of  advanced  visualization  tools  as  we  have  to  gain from them. 
    While geography and  computer  science  scholars  have  started  to adopt advanced  geovisualization  and  geovisual  analytics  approaches  that  can  help  generate knowledge  and  handle  uncertain  data, archaeology  has  not  yet  embraced  these  developments. 
    **While   some   archaeologists   rightly   acknowledge   the   limitations   of   GIS   technologies, criticisms  are  often based  on what  commercial  GIS  software  packages  can  (or  cannot)  do,  a situation  that  overlooks customizedgeovisualization  platforms  that can  better  handle  the temporal dimension and uncertain data.**
        -this is all really a result of digital literacy, if more archaeologists knew how to code there would be more tool development
    To harness  human  cognition  for  information  processing through   pattern   recognition,archaeologists   can   develop   visual   environments   that   enable navigation of the temporal component in archaeological data in new ways. We can benefit from interaction  with  data through  multiple  linked  views,  and  systems  that  set  a  given  temporal granularity  and  a  temporal  scale.  These  visual  systems  can  help  address  temporal ‘flattening’issues in archaeology.
    **In  an  era  where data  resources  and  availability far  exceed  the  technical  skills required to process   spatial   patterns   and   relationships   in   geo-referenced   information,   archaeologists concurrently  face  the  challenge  of  studying  complex phenomena  that require  collaborative research  across  different intellectual communities. Withgreater  availability  of  archaeological data  and  more  stringent  control  over  their  metadata,  there  are  growing  opportunities  to  developgeographic  visualization  tools  on Web-based  platforms.**
    In  addition,  reorientingour  view  of  maps  as  spatial  representations  that  facilitate the  generation  of  new  knowledge broadens  the  scope  of  computational  and  digital  archaeology. This   reorientation   can   significantly   expand possibilities   for   working   with   scholars   from disciplines  such  as  geography,  cognitive  science,  computer  science,  history  and  philosophy  of science,  and  anthropology,  collaborations  that  can  have  wider  implications  on  knowledge-making in the social and historical sciences.
    
FEEDBACK FROM PREVIOUS REFLECTIONS:

1. 
Hiya,
wk 1 Saw your annotations about Hypothesis; addressed those things there, thanks! In your reflection, I appreciated the quote you selected and your own question asking if we are not making the same mistake. How do we guard against that? And I especially appreciate your note about privilege/anonymity. So looks like you’re off to a good start! As we progress, having these notes and earlier reflections handy will enable you to trace out the evolution of your thinking about what digital archaeology is or could be or should be, and tying that evolution into the readings (the broader context) will help push you beyond your comfort zone. I look forward to hearing how this week’s work has gone; keep it up!
Dr Graham

2.
Hi Griffin, Emma here
 The questions that you ask regarding the ethics of digital archaeology are great; they really showcase all of the different aspects involved in trying to hammer out a concrete understanding of what is okay or not. Additionally, your notes on the issues that arose in your recording were excellent examples of the inherent problems with collecting data. Do these insights you’ve made in your own fieldwork give you a better understanding of the possible issues that may be present in the research of others that you encounter?
Emma G & Dr Graham

Hey,
Yeah for sure: I think that there is a very obvious issue with some public forms of digital archaeology. If there are no limits to who can contribute to an archaeological study then it is totally possible for people who have no expert knowledge to make mistakes and corrupt the data - like me recording the monuments. So, I think we have to be very careful about how much a wider audience can actually be trusted with data in that regard (not to mention, when data collection is open to the wider internet its possible for people to purposefully cause trouble).
Regards,
Griffin Shea

Hi,
Yep, out-and-out vandalism is always an issue. But sometimes I think the overall danger posed by non-experts is not as deal-breaking as it might first seem. Check out MIcropasts: https://crowdsourced.micropasts.org and Global Explorer https://www.globalxplorer.org/ for how they use cross-referencing of crowd work to mitigate errors… something similar to that’ll work in our case too.
Cheers,
Dr Graham

3.
Hi,
Looks like you’ve been progressing well with some of last week’s assignments. Writing what worked well and what didn’t work well in relation to building your model would be a good addition to your ‘notes’ section.
It sounds like you’re using your personal stories to get a better sense of what questions to ask regarding your research. This is really great, and will help you to be creative in your approach towards your project. It would be interesting to hear more about where emotions show up throughout the course of your research, and how this too might influence the questions you ask.
Looking forward to reading your work for this week,
Emma (& Dr Graham)

